README.markdown, before:

Saxon
=====

Functional Clojure wrapper for Michael Kay's 
[Saxon XSLT and XQuery Processor][saxonica] (from Saxonica Limited). 

Dependencies
------------

Are managed by [leiningen](http://github.com/technomancy/leiningen). Run 
`lein deps` to download jars into lib/. 

Install
-------

A jar is available on [Clojars](http://clojars.org). Use the following formula
in your `project.clj` `:dependencies`:

    [clojure-saxon "0.9.2"]


Use
---

###Query

The top-level function is `query`; it takes an XQuery or XPath expression, an 
optional namespace map, and a node. Here's returning a sequence of the names of 
all elements in a document:

    user=> (require '[saxon :as xml])
    nil
    user=> (xml/query "distinct-values(//element()/local-name())" xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")

Here's the same, limiting elements to those in the XHTML namespace:

    user=> (xml/query "distinct-values(//xhtml:*/local-name())" {:xhtml "http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"} xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")

Compiled XQuery expressions are cached:

    user=> (def complex-exp "//element()[@type='text/css']//local-name(parent::element()) = 'head'")
    #'user/complex-exp
    user=> (time (xml/query complex-exp xmldoc))
    "Elapsed time: 1.747 msecs"
    true
    user=> (time (xml/query complex-exp xmldoc))
    "Elapsed time: 0.226 msecs"
    true

but `query` accepts a compiled function (the result of `compile-xquery` or `compile-xpath`, 
below) as its first argument as well. (The *results* of the query are not cached.)


###Compile-xquery, Compile-xpath 

`compile-xquery` and `compile-xpath` are the lower-level functions behind `query`.
They take expressions and an optional namespace map, and return a function that applies
the compiled expression to a node. 

    user=> (xml/compile-xquery "distinct-values(//element()/local-name())")
    #<saxon$compile_xquery__302$fn__314 saxon$compile_xquery__302$fn__314@48c5186e>
    user=> ((xml/compile-xquery "distinct-values(//element()/local-name())") xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")

`compile-xquery` and `compile-xpath` cache their query arguments as well. 

###Compiling XML

Use `compile-xml` to produce the Saxon in-memory representation, an "XdmNode." 

    user=> (def xmldoc (xml/compile-xml (java.net.URL. "http://hdwdev.artsci.wustl.edu")))
    #'user/xmldoc
    
`compile-xml` takes a File, URL, InputStream, Reader, raw String, or an XdmNode.

    user=> (xml/compile-xml "<root/>")
    #<XdmNode <root/>>


###XSLT

`compile-xslt` takes the same arguments as `compile-xml` and returns a function 
that applies the compiled stylesheet to a node, with an optional map of parameters.


###Singletons

When the result of a query is a single item, the query functions return a singleton
instead of a sequence of one item, e.g.

    user=> (xml/query "count(//element())" xmldoc)
    7

I find this inconsistency convenient, but it might be a bad design choice. User feedback 
appreciated.   


###Laziness

Traversal of nodes is somewhat lazy, though not strictly so. The Clojure code
realizes the first two items of the return sequence, and the Saxon Java processor 
seems to keep a few items ahead as well. E.g. in `xmldoc`, with 7 element nodes:

    user=> (def returned (xml/query "for $e in //element() return trace(($e/local-name()), \"hit\")" xmldoc))
    hit [1]: xs:string: html
    hit [1]: xs:string: head
    hit [1]: xs:string: title
    #'user/returned
    user=> (nth returned 0)
    "html"
    user=> (nth returned 1)
    "head"
    user=> (nth returned 2)
    hit [1]: xs:string: style
    "title"
    user=> (nth returned 3)
    hit [1]: xs:string: body
    "style"
    user=> (nth returned 4)
    hit [1]: xs:string: p
    "body"
    user=> (nth returned 5)
    hit [1]: xs:string: a
    "p"
    user=> (nth returned 6)
    "a"

As you can see, three items are realized when the function is first executed, and
from when the third item is touched onward, realizing an item also realizes the 
*next* item in the background.

  
###Helper Functions

`node-path` returns an absolute XPath to a node:

    user=> (map xml/node-path (xml/query "//element()" xmldoc))
    ("/html" "/html/head[1]" "/html/head[1]/title[1]" "/html/head[1]/style[1]" "/html/body[1]" "/html/body[1]/p[1]" "/html/body[1]/a[1]")
   
`with-default-ns` adds a default namespace to an XQuery expression:

    user=> (xml/query (xml/with-default-ns "http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" "//*/local-name()") xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")
   


   [saxonica]: http://saxonica.com/
   [sfdl]: http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=29872&package_id=21888

Commit message:

add note to README.markdown that this is org.clojars.jedahu/clojure-saxon

README.markdown, after:

**Please note** that this is `org.clojars.jedahu/clojure-saxon`. The
intention is that it exist for only a short while until `clojure-saxon` is
sorted out. [ring-xslt] depends on it, but that too should be temporary. See
<https://github.com/pjt/saxon/pull/4> for more information.

[ring-xslt]: http://jedahu.github.com/ring-xslt/

Saxon
=====

Functional Clojure wrapper for Michael Kay's 
[Saxon XSLT and XQuery Processor][saxonica] (from Saxonica Limited). 

Dependencies
------------

Are managed by [leiningen](http://github.com/technomancy/leiningen). Run 
`lein deps` to download jars into lib/. 

Install
-------

A jar is available on [Clojars](http://clojars.org). Use the following formula
in your `project.clj` `:dependencies`:

    [clojure-saxon "0.9.2"]


Use
---

###Query

The top-level function is `query`; it takes an XQuery or XPath expression, an 
optional namespace map, and a node. Here's returning a sequence of the names of 
all elements in a document:

    user=> (require '[saxon :as xml])
    nil
    user=> (xml/query "distinct-values(//element()/local-name())" xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")

Here's the same, limiting elements to those in the XHTML namespace:

    user=> (xml/query "distinct-values(//xhtml:*/local-name())" {:xhtml "http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"} xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")

Compiled XQuery expressions are cached:

    user=> (def complex-exp "//element()[@type='text/css']//local-name(parent::element()) = 'head'")
    #'user/complex-exp
    user=> (time (xml/query complex-exp xmldoc))
    "Elapsed time: 1.747 msecs"
    true
    user=> (time (xml/query complex-exp xmldoc))
    "Elapsed time: 0.226 msecs"
    true

but `query` accepts a compiled function (the result of `compile-xquery` or `compile-xpath`, 
below) as its first argument as well. (The *results* of the query are not cached.)


###Compile-xquery, Compile-xpath 

`compile-xquery` and `compile-xpath` are the lower-level functions behind `query`.
They take expressions and an optional namespace map, and return a function that applies
the compiled expression to a node. 

    user=> (xml/compile-xquery "distinct-values(//element()/local-name())")
    #<saxon$compile_xquery__302$fn__314 saxon$compile_xquery__302$fn__314@48c5186e>
    user=> ((xml/compile-xquery "distinct-values(//element()/local-name())") xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")

`compile-xquery` and `compile-xpath` cache their query arguments as well. 

###Compiling XML

Use `compile-xml` to produce the Saxon in-memory representation, an "XdmNode." 

    user=> (def xmldoc (xml/compile-xml (java.net.URL. "http://hdwdev.artsci.wustl.edu")))
    #'user/xmldoc
    
`compile-xml` takes a File, URL, InputStream, Reader, raw String, or an XdmNode.

    user=> (xml/compile-xml "<root/>")
    #<XdmNode <root/>>


###XSLT

`compile-xslt` takes the same arguments as `compile-xml` and returns a function 
that applies the compiled stylesheet to a node, with an optional map of parameters.


###Singletons

When the result of a query is a single item, the query functions return a singleton
instead of a sequence of one item, e.g.

    user=> (xml/query "count(//element())" xmldoc)
    7

I find this inconsistency convenient, but it might be a bad design choice. User feedback 
appreciated.   


###Laziness

Traversal of nodes is somewhat lazy, though not strictly so. The Clojure code
realizes the first two items of the return sequence, and the Saxon Java processor 
seems to keep a few items ahead as well. E.g. in `xmldoc`, with 7 element nodes:

    user=> (def returned (xml/query "for $e in //element() return trace(($e/local-name()), \"hit\")" xmldoc))
    hit [1]: xs:string: html
    hit [1]: xs:string: head
    hit [1]: xs:string: title
    #'user/returned
    user=> (nth returned 0)
    "html"
    user=> (nth returned 1)
    "head"
    user=> (nth returned 2)
    hit [1]: xs:string: style
    "title"
    user=> (nth returned 3)
    hit [1]: xs:string: body
    "style"
    user=> (nth returned 4)
    hit [1]: xs:string: p
    "body"
    user=> (nth returned 5)
    hit [1]: xs:string: a
    "p"
    user=> (nth returned 6)
    "a"

As you can see, three items are realized when the function is first executed, and
from when the third item is touched onward, realizing an item also realizes the 
*next* item in the background.

  
###Helper Functions

`node-path` returns an absolute XPath to a node:

    user=> (map xml/node-path (xml/query "//element()" xmldoc))
    ("/html" "/html/head[1]" "/html/head[1]/title[1]" "/html/head[1]/style[1]" "/html/body[1]" "/html/body[1]/p[1]" "/html/body[1]/a[1]")
   
`with-default-ns` adds a default namespace to an XQuery expression:

    user=> (xml/query (xml/with-default-ns "http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" "//*/local-name()") xmldoc)
    ("html" "head" "title" "style" "body" "p" "a")
   


   [saxonica]: http://saxonica.com/
   [sfdl]: http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=29872&package_id=21888
